Efﬁcient Structured Parsing of Fac¸ades Using Dynamic Programming
Andrea Cohen1, Alexander G. Schwing2∗, Marc Pollefeys1
1ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
{acohen,pomarc}@inf.ethz.ch
2University of Toronto, Canada
aschwing@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
We propose a sequential optimization technique for seg-
menting a rectiﬁed image of a fac¸ade into semantic cate-
gories. Our method retrieves a parsing which respects com-
mon architectural constraints and also returns a certiﬁcate
for global optimality. Contrasting the suggested method,
the considered fac¸ade labeling problem is typically tackled
as a classiﬁcation task or as grammar parsing. Both ap-
proaches are not capable of fully exploiting the regularity of
the problem. Therefore, our technique very signiﬁcantly im-
proves the accuracy compared to the state-of-the-art while
being an order of magnitude faster. In addition, in 85% of
the test images we obtain a certiﬁcate for optimality.
1. Introduction
Monocular scene understanding is a long-standing goal
in computer vision. Just by looking at a single image, hu-
mans are able to infer information like depth and, more im-
portantly, relational structures, i.e., dependencies between
different and possibly partly occluded objects. Humans are
even able to come up with a short image sequence preced-
ing and succeeding a presented scene. However, none of
our algorithms are anywhere close to realistically achieving
this ability when given a single input image. Nevertheless,
there is an increasing amount of applications that success-
fully leverage monocular cues. Some notable examples are
prediction of room layouts [10, 17, 35, 25] when consider-
ing indoor scenes, as well as automatic photo-popup [11],
Make3D [22] and fac¸ade parsing approaches [32, 31, 18]
when considering the outdoor setting.
Common to many of those approaches, and in partic-
ular the fac¸ade parsing methods, is the initial formulation
as a pixel-wise labeling task using standard classiﬁers with
optional extensions to more complex structured prediction
methods. However, those approaches often operate on indi-
vidual pixels or super-pixels. While a super-pixel segmenta-
tion respects the edge-structure observed within an image to
some extent, a pixel-wise classiﬁcation is signiﬁcantly more
ﬂexible. Nonetheless, most of our man-made structures and
∗This work was done while at ETH Z¨urich
(a)
(b) Error: 6.7%
y2
y1
50
100
150
200
250
300
50
100
150
200
250
300
(c)
Figure 1. The fac¸ade in (a) and our obtained parsing overlaying
the image in (b) while the sparse green pattern in (c) indicates the
efﬁciency of our proposed approach.
fac¸ades are well-organized, e.g., into ﬂoors that are in turn
divided into repetitive elements. Naturally, those structural
concepts impose constraints on the semantic labeling of a
monocular image that should be beneﬁcially exploited.
Considering the monocular image understanding litera-
ture, many approaches possess no global guarantees. The
strong interplay between designing an appropriate cost
function and a corresponding algorithm for its rigorous op-
timization has, according to our opinion, been forgotten in
the past few years where many tasks are formulated as label-
ing problems. Some exceptions are the room layout estima-
tion of [26] and ﬁnding the globally optimal bounding box
given classiﬁer scores [16, 2]. We argue that construction
of applications on top of scene interpretations, e.g., by pre-
dicting affordances [8] or by investigating the interactions
between humans and objects [6], requires fast yet well per-
forming algorithms preferably possessing guarantees or re-
turning optimality certiﬁcates, i.e., indications of when the
obtained result is guaranteed to be optimal.
It seems ambitious to parse a fac¸ade like the one illus-
trated in Fig. 1(a) into semantic regions (Fig. 1(b)) to ob-
tain a globally optimal labeling or at least certiﬁcates for
global optimality. Nevertheless, we present an optimiza-
tion problem for which we can construct optimality certiﬁ-
cates while being more efﬁcient if not interested in their
computation. We ﬁrst present an appropriate optimization
problem and afterwards discuss usage of a dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm with extensions for improved expected
case efﬁciency. The latter amendment guarantees a sparse
number of calls to the dynamic programming algorithm as
1

illustrated in Fig. 1(c) where green pixels denote actual
calls while otherwise, evaluation of the algorithm would
have been required for every element of the entire upper-
triangular matrix.
All in all, our proposed algorithm requires individual ex-
ecutions of a dynamic program to ﬁnd a labeling. Global
optimality certiﬁcates are obtained if the individual algo-
rithms remain independent. We illustrate the efﬁcacy on
two standard datasets being the “Ecole Centrale Paris Fa-
cades Database” and the “Zurich Building Dataset”, as well
as the “eTRIMS database” with our quantitative evaluation
on the ﬁrst set indicating a 5.8% improvement compared to
current state-of-the-art while reducing computational cost
by an order of magnitude.
2. Related Work
Parsing the rectiﬁed image of a fac¸ade has long been
a prominent example for monocular scene understanding
with early approaches dating back to the seminal work of
Stiny [29]. Meanwhile, a multiplicity of methods on extrac-
tion and parsing of fac¸ades were proposed. While extraction
is the focus in [38, 21], modeling was considered by the au-
thors of [37, 19] and parsing in particular was also recently
discussed by [32, 31, 18] and references therein.
[32, 31] formulate the parsing problem by sampling
from a grammar restricting the space of possible parses.
Sampling accepts a new explanation once it scores higher
than the best previously found parsing.
However, non-
probabilistic optimality certiﬁcates for efﬁciently ﬁnding
the global optimum are not known since the strategy for
searching the state space is still largely random. Another ap-
proach based on Recursive Neural Networks was proposed
in [18] and shown to outperform previously existing meth-
ods. The authors present a three-layer approach with the
middle layer being a pairwise multi-label Markov Random
Field (MRF) solved via a graph-cut algorithm. A graph-
cut formulation is only optimal for binary MRFs with sub-
modular pairwise energies and hence the solution for the
multi-label MRF in [18] does not even possess optimality
certiﬁcates. More importantly though, the resulting label-
ing respects the structure introduced by the super-pixels.
Although those super-pixels follow the edge structure to
some extent, no guarantee exists for ﬁnding a visually pleas-
ing explanation that follows common architectural patterns.
Those were introduced within an independent third layer
and shown to slightly decrease labeling accuracy while oc-
casionally producing visually more pleasing results.
Hence, currently existing approaches exhibit no optimal-
ity certiﬁcates upon having found the parsing of a fac¸ade.
This is, however, true for many tasks considered within
computer vision with a few exceptions. Importantly, there is
a wide range of applications based on branch-and-bound in-
ference with examples ranging from object localization [16]
via landmark detection for model ﬁtting to images [1], to
camera parameter detection [9] [20]. Other examples are
based on maximum sum sub-array and maximum sum sub-
matrix [5] algorithms like [2]. Tasks that involve inference
over tree-structured graphs or graphs with low tree-width
are solved via dynamic-programming like message passing
techniques which are suitable for 2D scene labeling with
a speciﬁc structure as in [7]. Dynamic programming can
also be used for optimal 1D labeling for stereo [23] and
more general models in case a binary labeling is obtained.
Graph cut is the method of choice for binary MRFs with
sub-modular pairwise energies, which is applied to a num-
ber of (low-level) vision tasks like binary image denoising
and binary labeling, as described in [13]. Similar tasks can
be achieved via linear programming relaxations [36].
Optimality certiﬁcates and efﬁcient algorithms are – ac-
cording to our opinion – important for computer vision
since they shift the focus from the design of a large system
with many parameters to the design of features that repre-
sent valuable information for a speciﬁc application. Subse-
quently we are interested in providing an efﬁcient method
for the task of parsing a fac¸ade which can provide optimal-
ity certiﬁcates. Our approach follows the dynamic program-
ming paradigm and is detailed as follows.
3. Approach
We are interested in parsing every pixel of an im-
age illustrating a rectiﬁed fac¸ade into semantic cate-
gories subsumed within the following label set L
=
{sky, chimney, roof, window, balcony, wall, door, shop}.
While this problem is fairly complex in general, typical
fac¸ades exhibit a speciﬁc structure which greatly simpliﬁes
the parsing procedure.
We therefore argue subsequently
that exploiting these architectural constraints improves
the performance of a pixel-wise labeling task w.r.t. both
computational complexity as well as accuracy.
Let z ∈Z denote a parsing of a fac¸ade and assume that
Z denotes the exponentially sized set of all possible pixel-
wise image labelings. Clearly many of those parsings, like
randomly choosing a semantic label for every pixel, are not
at all reasonable when considering the regularity of man-
made structures. Due to the common rectangular structure
of fac¸ades, we rather let the set Z be described by a product
space with every member denoting a rectangular box. Im-
portantly, the size of this set, i.e., the number of boxes in-
volved, is not speciﬁed a-priori but rather determined when
explaining the observed image which is assumed to be of
quadratic dimension N×N for notational convenience only.
As usual, we measure the quality of the structured pars-
ing z ∈Z using a score function
S(z) =
X
i∈{1,...,N}2
si(zi)
(1)
summing for every pixel i within the image a score s that
depends on the pixel label zi ∈L induced by the parsing
z. The score si of pixel i for label zi is the normalized log-

likelihood output of a classiﬁer, i.e., si(zi) = log pi(zi) −
log P
l∈L pi(l) where pi is the multinomial probability dis-
tribution of pixel i over the label space L. Given the clas-
siﬁer scores and without constraints, the global maximum
of this log-likelihood is easily found by assigning a pixel-
sized box with label arg maxzi si(zi) to every pixel i. Such
a labeling is not very accurate as it ignores constraints on
fac¸ade layouts. We are, hence, interested in an approach en-
forcing more structure by maximizing the log-likelihood ra-
tio while respecting common architectural constraints sub-
sumed within the set C. This set consists of the following
constraints: all fac¸ade elements (door, windows, roof, bal-
conies) are represented by a rectangular box, balconies are
required to be located below windows and to have at least
the same width, all pairs of window/balcony lying on the
same ﬂoor have the same height, the shops are located on
the bottom, chimneys originate from the top of the roof,
the fac¸ade and the roof cover the entire width of the im-
age. Note that we operate with hard constraints rather than
the typical soft constraints included into MRF formulations
via Potts-type potentials. This strong structure allows to ex-
plain up to 98% of the ground-truth labelings used in our ex-
periments, making them more accurate in some cases. We
further emphasize and visualize in the experimental section
that the set C is general enough to represent typical fac¸ades.
Overview:
We start by outlining our approach for pars-
ing a fac¸ade given a rectiﬁed image. In particular, we will
ﬁnd a maximizer of the score given in Eq. (1) subject to
the aforementioned architectural constraints C. The pro-
cedure is visually outlined in Fig. 2. We assume all the
pixels to be initially assigned the label wall (see Fig. 2(a))
and begin by ﬁnding window-balcony rows throughout the
image. The scores used during this stage are those of win-
dows minus wall and balcony minus wall. For the detec-
tion of a single row of window-balcony, we use a chain-like
dynamic program along the width of the image, i.e., along
the x-coordinate. We only allow certain transitions between
the variables and provide details when discussing Alg 2.
To successively explain multiple window-balcony rows we
pursue a recursive approach which investigates image parts
above and below previously labeled areas. The results of
this ﬁrst step are illustrated in Fig. 2(b).
In a second step we use a variant of our dynamic program
to detect a combination of door and shop, such that the shop
starts at the bottom of the image, and the door lies within
the vertical boundaries of the shop. The top limit of the
shop is found by exhaustive search of the best door-shop
combination. A cost is payed for replacing any previous
labelings with shop and door. This is illustrated in Fig. 2(c).
In a third and last step, we jointly optimize for the labels
roof, sky and chimney. To this end, we optimize exhaus-
tively for two y-coordinates restricting the interior of the
roof where we replace previously assigned labels with roof
and at the same time optimize for a row of window/balcony
inside these boundaries by using window/balcony vs. roof
(a) Step 0
(b) Step 1
(c) Step 2
(d) Step 3
Figure 2. Output for each step of our fac¸ade parsing procedure.
scores. Similarly, all pixels above the y-coordinate denot-
ing the separation between roof and sky are relabeled from
the previous labeling to sky while ﬁnding chimneys is done
similarly to the search for windows (later described as DP1).
However, we allow chimneys to have different heights while
starting at the same y-coordinate offset. This ﬁnal step re-
trieves a maximizer of Eq. (1) subject to constraints C as
illustrated in Fig. 2(d).
Finding a row of elements:
Consider a task where we
are interested in ﬁnding an intermittent rectangular pattern
with heights being given by y1 and y2. Requiring all el-
ements to be rectangular, and assuming that all elements
share the same vertical limits, we are hence interested in
ﬁnding the highest scoring row of rectangular boxes {zk}
with zk = (xk,1, xk,2, y1, y2) ∈{1, . . . , N}4 that share
the same (y1, y2) coordinates. Besides a row of windows,
this can describe a row of balconies, an interrupted line of
shops, etc. The score of each box SWindow(z) is given (in
the case of a row of windows) by adding the log-likelihood
output s of all interior pixels being window while subtract-
ing the score of being wall. Having assumed all the pix-
els to be wall at ﬁrst is the reason for the subtraction since
we replace a wall label with a window label.
We pro-
pose a dynamic programming approach that, given a pair
of coordinates (y1, y2), ﬁnds the maximum scoring set of
boxes zk = (xk,1, xk,2, y1, y2) in O(N). We will refer to
this algorithm as DP1. DP1 is a version of Viterbi’s al-
gorithm [34] with 2 states representing the presence or the
absence of the element of interest, e.g., window. It was also
inspired by Kadane’s algorithm [4] which can ﬁnd the best
scoring box.
For each column of pixels in a row bounded by (y1, y2),
DP1 explores which state is the best depending on the pre-
vious column. Each column has 2 states: presence or ab-
sence of the window label on that column. A backwards
pass retrieves the best vertical boundaries for all windows
within (y1, y2). A minimum size s for windows is imposed
by adding s additional states (s = 5 in our case) and con-
straining the possible transitions. The algorithm complexity
is O(2 · (2 + s) · n). Note that the width of each window is
not ﬁxed in advance.
Claim 1 Finding the maximum scoring row of elements of
an N ×N image S is achievable in complexity less or equal
to O(N 3).
For a simple proof of this claim, assume the limiting up-

y
y1
y2 = y1 + 3
B
f
DP1(S, y1, y2)
b(y1, y2)
(a)
y1
y1 + 1
y2
?
b(y1, y2 −1) + θ(y2 −1)
b(y1 + 1, y2) + θ(y1)
(b)
y2
y1
50
100
150
200
250
300
50
100
150
200
250
300
(c)
Figure 3. In (a) we schematically illustrate the upper bound b(y1, y2) which exceeds the currently best score B only for y2 = y1 + 3 hence
triggering a DP1 operation, with its result being used for subsequent bound computations. To obtain a tighter bound b we also leverage
information from the preceding computations from y1 + 1 in addition to the bounds obtained only from the predecessor in y2 as depicted
in (b). The sparseness on real data is illustrated in (c) where a DP1 operation is triggered only for the green dots.
per and lower coordinates y1, y2 to be given. Finding the
maximum scoring boxes is then possible in time linear in
N using the previously described dynamic program. Since
there are O(N 2) different (y1, y2) pairs, we ﬁnd the maxi-
mum scoring row of elements in complexity less or equal to
cubic which proves the claim.
Improving expected case complexity:
The algorithm
sketched in the proof of Claim 1 requires DP1. for all pairs
of matrix rows (y1, y2) with y2 > y1. Looking at Fig. 1(c)
and Fig. 3(c) this corresponds to running the O(N) proce-
dure for all points in the upper triangular region of the plot.
Therefore, we next describe an optimality retaining strat-
egy which avoids unnecessary computations by construct-
ing an upper bound on the maximally possible row score
for a given y-coordinate pair (y1, y2). If the upper bound on
the score of all possible rows of elements with ﬁxed (y1, y2)
does not exceed the value of the best scoring row found so
far, it is not necessary to obtain the set of best x-coordinates
and its corresponding energy using DP1. This case is il-
lustrated by the blue colored (y1, y2) pairs in Fig. 1(c) and
Fig. 3(c), while the actual calls to DP1 are colored green.
To obtain this bound we notice that it is possible to com-
pute the best scoring row for all pairs y1, y2 = y1 + 1, i.e.,
all rows of rectangles being one pixel high, in O(N 2) be-
cause there are only N pairs each requiring the O(N) pro-
cedure of DP1. More formally, we initially construct the ar-
ray θ of best scores for all rows of boxes which are a single
pixel high, i.e., θ(y1) = P
k S(x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2, y1, y1 + 1) with
the optimal single-height boxes for coordinate y1 being sub-
sumed within the set {(x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2)}y1 = DP1(S, y1, y1+1)
∀y1 ∈{1, . . . , N −1}. Notice that S represents an N × N
matrix of scores. This initial O(N 2) step provides informa-
tion which is valuable twice.
Firstly,
we
obtain
a
lower
score
bound
maxy1∈{1,...,N−1} θ(y1) on the optimal value of the
score S by taking the maximum over the energies of all
rows of boxes that are of one pixel height. If this score
bound is negative, we know that S is optimal and terminate
with the best row of boxes found so far.
Secondly
and
more
importantly,
we
notice
that
the sum of all single pixel high row contributions
between
an
arbitrarily
chosen
pair
of
y-coordinates
(y1, y2) with y2
>
y1
provides an upper bound
for
the
best
row
of
boxes
found
within
this
y-
coordinate pair since the x-coordinates xk,1, xk,2 are
not required to match between individual rows.
In
equations, Py2−1
y=y1 θ(y)
≥
P
k S(x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2, y1, y2) for
{(x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2)} = DP1(S, y1, y2). This upper bound will
be referred to as b(y1, y2) = Py2−1
y=y1 θ(y). In particular, we
know that the only pairs (y1, y2) that are worth being more
closely investigated are those for which the upper bound on
the row score, b(y1, y2) = b(y1, y2−1)+θ(y2−1), is larger
than the currently best known score B.
Consider Fig. 3(a) where the dashed line illustrates the
currently best known score bound B. The white rectangle
indicates y1. For increasing y2 we continuously add indi-
vidual row contributions and, hence, obtain an upper bound
b(y1, y2) on the best achievable score value for the respec-
tive pair (y1, y2). If this upper bound exceeds the currently
best known score, we utilize DP1 to obtain either a row
scoring higher than B or, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a), a new
upper bound value b(y1, y2) which will be used for succes-
sive bound computations. In addition to this bound obtained
for a ﬁxed y1 we also draw information from the previously
computed y1 + 1 since we also know the maximal devia-
tion θ(y1) between y1 and y1 + 1. Therefore, as illustrated
in Fig. 3(b), this dynamic programming like 2D extension
computes a new bound b(y1, y2) as the minimum of two up-
per bounds which decreases the required O(N) operations
even further. We illustrate the required amount of linear
time operations on real data in Fig. 3(c) and provide quan-
titative results in Sec. 4.
Putting all of the above information together we are
now ready to describe an algorithm (Alg. 1) with guar-
anteed worst case complexity O(N 3) and expected case
run-time to be revealed by experiments. We start by ﬁnd-
ing the scores of the best row boxes being a single pixel
high (l.2 of Alg. 1) and check for optimality.
Then we
proceed by iterating y1 from the last positive single row
contribution N + = arg maxy{y : θ(y) ≥0} until the
ﬁrst row found to have a positive contribution, i.e., until
arg miny{y : θ(y) ≥0}. This is sufﬁcient since any row
score starting in a row with only negative contributions can

Algorithm 1 dynamic programming with bounds
1: for all y1 ∈{1, . . . , N −1} do
2:
(x∗
1, x∗
2) ←DP1(S, y1, y1 + 1)
3:
θ(y1) ←S(x∗
1, x∗
2, y1, y1 + 1)
4: end for
5: B ←maxy θ(y)
6: if B > 0 then
7:
for y1 = {N + −1, N + −2, . . .}, y2 = {y1 +
1, . . . , N +} do
8:
b(y1, y2) = min{b(y1, y2 −1)+θ(y2 −1), b(y1 +
1, y2) + θ(y1)}
9:
if b(y1, y2) > B then
10:
(x∗
i1, x∗
i2) ←DP1(S, y1, y2)
11:
b(y1, y2) ←S(x∗
1, x∗
2, y1, y1 + 1)
12:
if b(y1, y2) > B then
13:
keep better box, let B ←b(y1, y2)
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
end for
17: end if
be increased by avoiding the negative rows preceding the
ﬁrst positive row. For each y1 we iterate y2 from y1 + 1
to the last positive single row contribution, which is sufﬁ-
cient for the same reason. We update the bound b(y1, y2)
(l.8) using the aforementioned dynamic programming like
extension and check whether the O(N) DP1 procedure is
required to be run for the current y-coordinate pair (y1, y2).
More complex structures:
So far, we designed a method
to efﬁciently ﬁnd the highest scoring row of rectangular re-
gions within an image. In fac¸ades, however, we often en-
counter complex structures like the combination of win-
dows and balconies. We would like to ﬁnd two rows of
boxes z1, z2 located below each other. We want to maxi-
mize P Sk,1(xk,1, xk,2, y1, y2) + P Sj,2(xj,1, xj,2, y2, y3)
with Sk,1 integrating the probability mass for exchanging
wall with window inside the rectangle. Similarly, Sj,2 per-
forms the same operation for the balcony. One should notice
that, the only condition being that a balcony has to have at
least one window above and a window has to have one bal-
cony below, the number of windows and balconies detected
might not be the same as long as this condition is respected
(since two windows may lie above the same larger balcony).
Given a triplet of y-coordinates with y1 < y2 < y3, we
optimize P Sk,1 + Sj,2 in linear time using an extension
of DP1 by adding more possible states. Instead of having
only two states (absence or presence of the element of in-
terest), we now have the following states: absence of both
window and balcony, presence of balcony and presence of
balcony and window. In order to ensure that no balcony
appears without a window above it, we have two balcony
states: the one that can appear before a window has been
detected (which cannot transition back to absence of bal-
cony), and the one that appears after a window has been
detected. We limit the possible transitions between states
such that these conditions are fulﬁlled. We refer to this al-
gorithm as DP2. Since we only deal with a constant number
of states (4 for this case), the complexity remains of O(N).
For the cubic amount of triplets that need to be inves-
tigated in order to ﬁnd the best row of window/balcony
we obtain a quartic worst case complexity algorithm –
O(N 4).
For a more efﬁcient expected case complexity,
an extension of Alg. 1 to 3 dimensions is required.
In
spirit of the previous method, we again design a bound to
avoid running DP2 frequently. Taking into account the two
functions, we utilize two arrays of single row rectangles
θ1(y) = P Sk,1(x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2, y, y + 1) with (x∗
k,1, x∗
k,2) =
DP1(S1, y, y + 1) and θ2(y) = P Sj,2(x∗
j,1, x∗
j,2, y, y + 1)
with (x∗
j,1, x∗
j,2) = DP1(S2, y, y+1) ∀y ∈{1, . . . , N}. S1
and S2 represent the matrices of scores for window vs. wall
and balcony vs. wall respectively. Analogously to before,
we obtain the bound to determine whether to use DP2 via
the minimum of the two terms modiﬁed by the arrays θ1(y1)
and θ2(y3). Importantly, it is beneﬁcial to add a third term
depending on y2. The bound reads:
b(y1, y2, y3) = min





b(y1 + 1, y2, y3) + θ1(y1),
b(y1, y2 −1, y3) + θ1(y2 −1)
−minS2(y2 −1),
b(y1, y2, y3 −1) + θ2(y3 −1)
,
where minS2(y) is the minimum score found in row y for
matrix S2. Since we are looking for an upper bound, we
need to subtract the minimum loss that we get when we
replace a pixel-high row of the second element with a row
of the ﬁrst element. Instead of a sparse upper-triangular
matrix we obtain a sparse “upper-pyramidal” tensor. We
refer to this 3D modiﬁcation as Alg. 2. All rows of balcony-
windows can be found by recursively applying Alg. 2.
Shop ﬂoor detection:
Let shopLine be the vertical
boundary for the shop ﬂoor. A variation of DP1 is used
in order to ﬁnd the best horizontal boundaries for a line of
intermittent shops spanning from the bottom of the image
up to shopLine, as well as the best door rectangle lying
between the shop boundaries. Note that a door is not al-
lowed to lie in front of a shop. To this end, we extend the
set of possible states that need to be investigated for each
x-coordinate: absence of shop and door, presence of shop
(spanning the whole column between the bottom of the im-
age and shopLine) and presence of door. As we only de-
tect one door, there are two states representing the absence
of shop and door, as well as the presence of shop, indi-
cating whether a door has already appeared or not. Since
we don’t know in advance the vertical boundaries of the
door, there is one possible state for every possible pair of
vertical boundaries that lie between the bottom of the im-
age and shopLine. The possible transitions between states
are limited such that only one door can appear. The num-
ber of possible door boundaries depends on the height of
the shopLine, therefore, this dynamic programming has a

Class
No chimney
Chimney
[31]
[18](2)
[18](3)
Ours1
Ours2
Oursw
Ours1
Ours2
Oursw
Window [%]
62
69
75
67
87
85
68
87
85
Wall [%]
82
93
88
92
88
90
92
88
90
Balcony [%]
58
71
70
82
92
91
82
92
91
Door [%]
47
60
67
42
82
79
42
82
79
Roof [%]
66
73
74
86
93
90
85
92
91
Sky [%]
95
91
97
97
96
97
93
93
94
Shop [%]
88
86
93
94
96
94
94
96
94
Chimney [%]
-
-
-
-
-
-
54
90
85
total acc. [%]
74.71
85.06
84.17
87.77
90.34
90.82
86.71
89.90
90.34
Table 1. Results on the ECP dataset. The last three columns show the results obtained by adding the chimney estimation.
complexity of O(shopLine2 · N).
Global optimality certiﬁcate:
The parsing, i.e., succes-
sive application of our steps, guarantees a globally optimal
result if each step is optimal on its own and if steps are in-
dependent of each other.
Detection of window/balcony rows: Alg. 2 obtains the
best scoring row of balcony/windows respecting the set of
constraints. Since there are no constraints between rows
(each row can have a different height/number of windows,
etc.), we recursively look for the best rows above and be-
low the ones found so far. Even though this is a greedy
approach, we are able to verify global optimality as fol-
lows. We construct a function f(y) that is deﬁned such that
Py3
y=y1 f(y) = DP2(y1, y2, y3) for all sets of (y1, y2, y3)
deﬁning a detected window/balcony row, and f(y) = 0
elsewhere. If we are able to construct this function, it is easy
to see that the PN
y=0 f(y) yields the combined score for the
complete window/balcony layout detected on the facade. If
we can verify for each valid combination (y1, y2, y3) that
Py3
y=y1 f(y) is an upper-bound for DP2(y1, y2, y3), then
global optimality is established. We were able to verify this
for 85% of the images.
Shop and door detection: Since the door boundaries are
found by joint optimization of the horizontal boundaries of
the shop, and the shop vertical limit is found by exhaustive
search, this step is optimal if it doesn’t interfere with pre-
viously detected structures. If a combination of shop/door
completely overrides a set of window/balcony, or it doesn’t
touch any of them, they are independent and the algorithm
is optimal. If, on the contrary, it partially occludes a row of
windows, then the optimality is no longer guaranteed.
Joint optimization of roof, sky and chimney: Optimal-
ity is guaranteed as long as the roof line doesn’t partially
occlude a row of windows. This step has a worst case com-
plexity of O(N 5) although in practice the search space for
window/balcony inside the roof is much smaller.
There are three cases where global optimality is not guar-
anteed. The detected window/balcony rows are not optimal
or the steps interact: shop ﬂoor touches windows or roof
touches windows. For the ECP dataset [30], the second case
appears only in 5% of the images while the third case ap-
pears in 6% of the images (with an overlap of 2%). The
ﬁrst case is present on 15% of the images (with a full over-
lap with the other two cases). Global optimality is therefore
guaranteed in 85% of the images for this data set.
4. Experiments
Subsequently, we ﬁrst evaluate our proposed approach
quantitatively on two different datasets, discuss some im-
plementation details, and provide qualitative results on mul-
tiple other datasets. For the quantitative evaluation we ﬁrst
compare our method to current state-of-the-art approaches
w.r.t. both computational efﬁciency and pixel-wise labeling
accuracy. For the latter we utilize the “Ecole Centrale Paris
Facades Database” (ECP) [30] as well as the “eTRIMS Im-
age Database” [14].
To emphasize the generality of the
method and due to no publicly available annotations, we
additionally provide only qualitative results on a subset of
72 images from the “Zurich Building dataset” (ZuBud) [27]
rectiﬁed by detecting vanishing points as in [3]. We also
tested our method on a dataset of 122 images of rectiﬁed
fac¸ades from around the world available from [30]. No-
tice that since there is no ground-truth available for these
last two datasets, we obtained the scores for the images by
using the same classiﬁers that were trained using the ECP
dataset, yielding, in most cases, very inaccurate scores.
ECP dataset
The ECP database consists of 104 rectiﬁed
images of fac¸ades. The annotations provided by [18] consist
of: {sky, chimney, roof, window, balcony, wall, door, shop}.
We report results for the quasi-optimal approach subse-
quently referred to as “Ours.” Tab. 1 shows class accura-
cies for all methods and compares the performance of our
proposed algorithm to related previous approaches, i.e., re-
inforcement learning presented in [31] and the accuracies
of the top two layers (2,3) presented in [18]. We improve
labeling accuracy by 6.6% w.r.t. the top layer of [18] and by
5.8% compared to the best accuracy reported till date [18].
Notice that chimneys were ignored in previous work. For
a fair comparison with existing methods, we provide re-
sults with and without chimney estimation. We observe our
method to yield a balanced performance across all classes.
Implementation details:
To obtain the probability distri-
butions pi we use two different methods. The results of ap-
plying our parsing on top of each of these methods is illus-
trated in Tab. 1 and are referrred to as “Ours1” and “Ours2”

Method
[32] [31] [18]
Ours/Oursw
Time [s]
600
30
110
2.8
Table 2. Average run-time per image for different approaches.
respectively. The ﬁrst method obtains the probability distri-
butions by training a boosted decision tree classiﬁer which
uses the same features as reported in [18], thus obtaining
very similar results as their ﬁrst layer. We also tested a sec-
ond method in order to further push the state of the art. We
use the multi-feature extension [15] of the TextonBoost al-
gorithm [28]. First, we extract four dense features - SIFT,
textons, ternary patterns and self-similarity. For each pixel
each of these features is clustered into 512 clusters. The
context-based feature vector for each pixel is a concatena-
tion of bag-of-words representations over a ﬁxed random
set of 200 rectangles. The most discriminative weak fea-
tures are found using multi-class boosting [33] as explained
in [28]. We follow [18] and perform 5-fold cross-validation
by dividing the dataset into ﬁve disjoint subsets, training an
eight class boosted classiﬁer on four of those subsets of the
ECP dataset while testing on the ﬁfth.
Rather than weighting the probability distributions pi
obtained by the second method equally across classes, we
learn eight linear weights and subsequently refer to this ex-
tension as “Oursw.” We learn those additional parameters
using the cutting plane algorithm for structured support vec-
tor machines [12] since our fac¸ade labeling retrieves op-
timal results frequently.
To this end we use the parallel
implementation developed in [24]. Considering the results
presented in Tab. 1 we observe slight improvements in over-
all accuracy attributed mainly to a beter prediction of the
frequently occurring wall label.
So far we have not discussed the efﬁciency of our pro-
posed parsing algorithm which relies on a few sparse calls to
DP1, DP2 and their variants. For illustrations purposes, the
sparseness of the calls is shown for the 2D case of detecting
an interrupted row of roof (Alg. 1) as an upper-triangular
matrix in Fig. 1(c) and Fig. 3(c). We note that DP1 is only
called in 3.6% of the cases. This results in an overall aver-
age parsing time of 2.8 seconds per image on a i7-930 2.8
GHz desktop. This outperforms the 30 seconds per image
detailed in [31] and the 110 seconds given by the authors
of [18] in personal communication by more than one order
of magnitude. The average processing time of different al-
gorithms is summarized in Tab. 2.
eTRIMS database
In order to show the versatility of
our approach, we also tested our method on the eTRIMS
dataset, which consists of 60 images of non-rectiﬁed
fac¸ades. For a fair comparison, we perform 5-fold cross-
validation as in [18]. The results are illustrated in Tab. 3.
The probability distributions pi were obtained by apply-
ing the ﬁrst layer of [18]. We achieve a pixel accuracy of
83.84% , comparable to [18] 2nd layer results (83.16%) and
superior to the 3rd facade-structured layer (81.63%), while
adding structure to the labeling.
4.9%
5.5%
5.9%
6.7%
6.5%
6.4%
6.7%
6.7%
Figure 4. Results on the ECP dataset and classiﬁcation errors.
14%
15.2%
13.5%
9.1%
Figure 5. Results on the eTRIMS dataset and classiﬁcation errors.
Figure 6. Qualitative results on various datasets.
Qualitative Evaluation:
Some of the results of the ap-
proximately optimal approach are presented in Fig. 4 to-
gether with their respective classiﬁcation errors including
the chimney class.
We also show some results for the
eTRIMS dataset in Fig. 5.
Some qualitative results for both the ZuBud dataset [27]
and the multiple fac¸ades dataset from [30] are provided in
Fig. 6. Our approach returns a visually appealing result for
most images. The errors encountered are due to the fact
that the scores are very inaccurate since the classiﬁers were
trained only for the ECP dataset. We refer the reader to our
website1 for results on the full datasets.
Class
[18](1)
[18](2)
[18](3)
Ours
Building [%]
88
91
87
91
Car [%]
69
69
69
70
Door [%]
25
18
19
18
Pavement [%]
34
33
34
33
Road [%]
56
55
56
57
Sky [%]
94
93
94
97
Vegetation [%]
89
89
88
90
Window [%]
71
74
79
71
total acc. [%]
81.87
83.16
81.63
83.84
Table 3. Results on the eTRIMS dataset.
1http://www.inf.ethz.ch/personal/acohen/papers/facadeParsing.php

5. Conclusions
We presented a method for parsing images of fac¸ades
based on a dynamic programming algorithm and bound
computations to improve efﬁciency. We showed its efﬁcacy
on two standard benchmark datasets and provided results
outperforming existing state-of-the-art approaches, reveal-
ing increased accuracy and reducing computational cost by
an order of magnitude. We show qualitative results for two
additional datasets. We plan to extend our work to incor-
porate edge information for an improved parsing, as well
as learning of parameters to accommodate different fac¸ade
styles. The strong structure used in this work also shows
potential for semi-supervised or unsupervised learning.
6. Acknowledgements
We thank Andelo Martinovic for providing the scores for
the eTRIMS dataset. We gratefully acknowledge the sup-
port of the 4DVideo ERC Starting Grant Nr. 210806.
References
[1] B. Amberg and T. Vetter. Optimal Landmark Detection us-
ing Shame Models and Branch and Bound. In Proc. CVPR,
2011. 2
[2] S. An, P. Peursum, W. Liu, and S. Venkatesh. Efﬁcient Al-
gorithms for Subwindow Search in Object Detection and Lo-
calization. In Proc. CVPR, 2009. 1, 2
[3] G. Baatz, K. Koeser, R. Grzeszczuk, and M. Pollefeys. Han-
dling Urban Location Recognition as a 2D Homothetic Prob-
lem. In Proc. ECCV, 2010. 6
[4] J. Bentley.
Programming pearls: algorithm design tech-
niques. Commun. ACM, 1984. 3
[5] J. Bentley.
Programming pearls: perspective on perfor-
mance. Commun. ACM, 1984. 2
[6] V. Delaitre, D. F. Fouhey, I. Laptev, J. Sivic, A. Gupta, and
A. A. Efros. Scene semantics from long-term observation of
people. In Proc. ECCV, 2012. 1
[7] P. F. Felzenszwalb and O. Veksler. Tiered 3D Labeling with
Dynamic Programming. In Proc. CVPR, 2010. 2
[8] A. Gupta, S. Satkin, A. A. Efros, and M. Hebert.
From
3D Scene Geometry to Human Workspace. In Proc. CVPR,
2011. 1
[9] R. Hartley and F. Kahl. Global Optimization through Rota-
tion Space Search. IJCV, 2009. 2
[10] V. Hedau, D. Hoiem, and D. Forsyth. Recovering the Spatial
Layout of Cluttered Rooms. In Proc. ICCV, 2009. 1
[11] D. Hoiem, A. A. Efros, and M. Hebert. Automatic Photo
Pop-up. In SIGGRAPH, 2005. 1
[12] T. Joachims, T. Finley, and C.-N. J. Yu. Cutting-plane train-
ing of structural SVMs. JMLR, 2009. 7
[13] V. Kolmogorov. What Energy Functions Can Be Minimized
via Graph Cuts? In Proc. CVPR, 2004. 2
[14] F. Korˇc and W. F¨orstner. eTRIMS Image Database for inter-
preting images of man-made scenes. Technical Report TR-
IGG-P-2009-01, April 2009. 6
[15] L. Ladick´y, C. Russell, P. Kohli, and P. H. S. Torr. Associa-
tive Hierarchical Random Fields. PAMI, 2013. 7
[16] C. H. Lampert, M. B. Blaschko, and T. Hofmann. Efﬁcient
Subwindow Search: A Branch and Bound Framework for
Object Localization. PAMI, 2009. 1, 2
[17] D. C. Lee, A. Gupta, M. Hebert, and T. Kanade. Estimating
Spatial Layout of Rooms using Volumetric Reasoning about
Objects and Surfaces. In Proc. NIPS, 2010. 1
[18] A. Martinovic, M. Mathias, J. Weissenberg, and L. van Gool.
A Three-Layered Approach to Facade Parsing.
In Proc.
ECCV, 2012. 1, 2, 6, 7
[19] M. Mathias, A. Martinovic, J. Weissenberg, S. Haegler, and
L. van Gool. Automatic Architectural Style Recognition. In
Proc. 3D-ARCH, 2011. 2
[20] C. Olsson, F. Kahl, and M. Oskarsson. Optimal Estimation
of Perspective Camera Pose. In Proc. ICPR, 2006. 2
[21] M. Recky, A. Wendel, and F. Leberl. Facade Segmentation
in a Multi-View Scenario. In Proc. 3DIMPVT, 2011. 2
[22] A. Saxena, M. Sun, and A. Y. Ng. Make3D: Learning 3D
Scene Structure from a Single Still Image. PAMI, 2008. 1
[23] D. Scharstein, R. Szeliski, and R. Zabih. A Taxonomy and
Evaluation of Dense Two-Frame Stereo Correspondence Al-
gorithms. IJCV, 2002. 2
[24] A. G. Schwing, S. Fidler, M. Pollefeys, and R. Urtasun. Box
In the Box: Joint 3D Layout and Object Reasoning from Sin-
gle Images. In Proc. ICCV, 2013. 7
[25] A. G. Schwing, T. Hazan, M. Pollefeys, and R. Urtasun. Efﬁ-
cient Structured Prediction for 3D Indoor Scene Understand-
ing. In Proc. CVPR, 2012. 1
[26] A. G. Schwing and R. Urtasun. Efﬁcient Exact Inference for
3D Indoor Scene Understanding. In Proc. ECCV, 2012. 1
[27] H. Shao, T. Svoboda, and L. van Gool.
ZuBuD - Zurich
Building Database for Image Based Recognition. Technical
Report 260, CV Lab, ETHZ, 2003. 6, 7
[28] J. Shotton, J. Winn, C. Rother, and A. Criminisi. Texton-
Boost: Joint Appearance, Shape and Context Modeling for
Multi-Class Object Recognition and Segmentation. In Proc.
ECCV, 2006. 7
[29] G. Stiny. Pictorial and Formal Aspects of Shape and Shape
Grammars. Birkhauser Verlag, 1975. 2
[30] O. Teboul.
Ecole Centrale Paris Facades Database.
http://vision.mas.ecp.fr/Personnel/
teboul/data.php, 2010. 6, 7
[31] O. Teboul, I. Kokinos, L. Simon, P. Koutsourakis, and
N. Paragios.
Shape Grammar Parsing via Reinforcement
Learning. In Proc. CVPR, 2011. 1, 2, 6, 7
[32] O. Teboul, L. Simon, P. Koutsourakis, and N. Paragios. Seg-
mentation of Building Facades Using Procedural Shape Pri-
ors. In Proc. CVPR, 2010. 1, 2, 7
[33] A. Torralba, K. Murphy, and W. Freeman. Sharing Features:
Efﬁcient Boosting Procedures for Multiclass Object Detec-
tion. In Proc. CVPR, 2004. 7
[34] A. J. Viterbi. Error bounds for convolutional codes and an
asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm.
Information
Theory, 1967. 3
[35] H. Wang, S. Gould, and D. Koller. Discriminative Learn-
ing with Latent Variables for Cluttered Indoor Scene Under-
standing. In Proc. ECCV, 2010. 1
[36] T. Werner. A Linear Programming Approach to Max-sum
Problem: A review. PAMI, 2007. 2
[37] J. Xiao, T. Fang, P. Zhao, M. Lhuillier, and L. Quan. Image-
based Street-side City Modeling. In SIGGRAPH, 2009. 2
[38] P. Zhao, T. Fang, J. Xiao, H. Zhang, Q. Zhao, and L. Quan.
Rectilinear Parsing of Architecture in Urban Environment.
In Proc. CVPR, 2010. 2
